Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 418,
Introduction to Core Data.
My name is Andreas Wendker,
and I'm the senior manager
for Core Data and WebObjects.
Core Data is a new framework that
we added under the Cocoa umbrella,
and it continues an initiative we
started last year with Cocoa Bindings.
That's the initiative to bring you and
your applications more functionality
for writing significantly less code.
Like bindings, Core Data fills a gap in
the Cocoa functionality.
Core Data is concerned with
fine-grained management of data objects.
In this space, it solves a number of
very difficult problems,
and I actually believe that it
will have a much stronger impact
on your application development
than even Cocoa bindings had.
When I talk about data
objects in this session,
I really mean the objects that you
usually refer to as the "model objects"
in the ModelViewController sense.
But I'm going to use the
term "model" in a different
context throughout the session,
so I decided to stick with data objects.
Also,
I'd like to distinguish Core Data clearly
from the new Metadata API,
the new Spotlight API.
Core Data is about the
inside of your data files,
about your own applications' documents.
Metadata is about the surface,
about the outside of those files
that you want to export to the
file system and to the search API.
So in one single sentence,
Core Data is a model-driven object graph
management and persistency framework.
That's certainly a mouthful,
but what does it actually mean?
It means that with Core Data,
instead of writing a lot of code,
you create a description
of your data objects.
You create a description in Xcode,
and that description is called
the model of your application.
And the model is what's used by
Core Data to manage pretty much most
aspects of your data objects for you,
and it's doing that both
in memory and on disk.
That means that you are actually
freed up to focus entirely on your
application-specific problem domain,
instead of having to focus on developing
infrastructure for your application.
So what can we do with the model?
I think the most immediate benefit
to many of you will probably be that
we can provide you with automatic
undo and redo in your applications.
So with Core Data, no more worrying about
that NSUndoManager.
We also provide you with scalable
object lifecycle management.
That means that we actually only
keep the pieces of your data in
memory that is currently needed
and we leave the rest on disk,
so it scales very well.
We will automatically
synchronize the user interface.
We do that through Cocoa bindings,
but we added a few pieces to bindings
to make the integration even smoother.
And Core Data also helps you
greatly to manage the consistency
and correctness of your data.
And all you have to do is specify a
bunch of rules in the model that tell
Core Data how to validate user input
and how to maintain relationships or
references of your objects to each other.
The other thing we can do is
we can automatically read and
write your objects to the disk.
And we're going to support
three different file formats
in this first release:
SQL databases, XML files,
and binary archive files.
SQL files are implemented
on top of SQLite,
which is a very nice, lightweight,
embeddable SQL database.
It's an open source project.
And SQL databases will usually
give you the best scalability
if you have large sets of data.
And that's the case because
with SQL databases we can
update your files incrementally.
We don't have to write the entire
file if just one object changes.
Everything is incremental and a lot
of the data can stay on the disk.
We only fetch them into
memory when needed.
XML files have the huge advantage that
they are human readable and they are
easily consumed by other applications
if you need to exchange data,
but they won't give you
the same performance.
One other advantage of XML files is
that they are written atomically,
so if you are in a typical Cocoa document
context where you want to write
the files atomically if you save,
then XML files are
actually a very good fit.
Binary files are kind of in the middle,
they are probably a good compromise,
they don't give you quite the performance
of SQL databases and they don't
scale to the very large data sets,
but they are written atomically
and they are reasonably fast.
What's important for this first
release is that when you use Core Data,
we will take ownership
of the file formats,
of the file schemas.
So on the one hand,
that's great because you don't
even have to worry about creating
tables in your SQL database or
creating the schema for XML.
On the other hand, you will lose detailed
control of your file formats.
To give you some examples of
what you could do with Core Data,
I actually just looked at my
doc and the typical applications
I use on a daily basis.
And none of these applications,
disclaimer,
are actually using Core Data right now.
We are still building up Core Data.
It's really early.
But I think it gives you an idea
of what the scope is of things
that you can solve with Core Data.
So, starting with Safari,
the history and bookmark files,
that would be a great thing
you could do with Core Data.
Persons and groups,
even the mailbox files within Mail,
the music library of iTunes,
calendar files in iCal,
even sketch documents,
which have the different graphics in it,
and project files in Xcode.
Those are all great
candidates for Core Data.
Essentially,
every application that manages
lots of objects will benefit
greatly from using Core Data.
The applications that will not see
that much of a benefit are applications
that work on large blobs of data.
So, for example, TextEdit,
that works on the RTF or text files,
and maybe image processing software
won't benefit that much from Core Data.
So why is it good for you?
Most importantly,
because it relieves you from
having to reinvent the wheel
again and again and again.
Implementing undo and Redo,
managing the lifecycle of your objects,
input validation,
it's all very mundane work that you
have to implement for every application,
and with Core Data it's done for you.
You save a lot of time,
you will have a much
faster development cycle.
Core Data also will give you
robustness and flexibility.
The choice of different types of data
stores with the different characteristics
and scalability and human readability,
etc.
I think will turn out very handy
for many of your applications.
And also very important,
Core Data will prepare you well
for the future for features
you might add in Cocoa.
Now that we have a model,
we can interpret that model
in many different ways without
you writing any line of code.
So you could envision us to, for example,
add Apple Scriptability
to your applications,
or maybe automatic
rendezvous connectivity.
So there are some features we are
looking at in the future that I think
you will be able to pick up automatically
if you start using Core Data soon.
These are actually fine-wet screenshots
from an actual application we
converted over to Core Data recently.
And that application was
already using Cocoa bindings,
so there was no glue
code for the UI layer.
And as you can see,
we were still able to shave
off a lot of the code.
And by the way,
this application now has more
features than it had before.
For example, now it has undo and redo.
So with that,
I would like to ask James Dempsey
to come up on stage and give
you a first demo of Core Data.
Thank you, Andreas.
So what we're taking a look
at here is an XML document as
might be managed by Core Data.
We're going to put that away for now.
We're going to jump right in
and build a full-featured,
document-based application with
zero lines of code using Core Data.
We're going to use the
Core Data Document-Based
Application Project.
Call that thing.
Demo 1.
And with Cocoa bindings,
you essentially had your data objects
able to be synchronized with user
interface objects through bindings,
but you still had to manage
those data objects yourself.
With Core Data, it's kind of like the
other half of the equation,
where those data objects,
you can model them,
Core Data will help you manage them,
and also deal with the persistence.
So let's take a little
look at the project.
and the code that's in there.
If we take a look at the classes,
we have a document class,
which is a subclass of
NSPersistentDocument,
which in turn is a
subclass of NSDocument,
and this subclass adds all of the hooks
needed to interoperate with Core Data,
including persistence.
Let's take a look at
the implementation file,
and you'll notice a couple of
common NSDocument methods here,
and a few that are missing,
ostensibly those that are
for writing and reading data.
So, we don't need these
initialization items either.
So, in essence,
this is a negative lines of code demo.
We'll next look at a new
resource in the project:
the model.
A little later in the session,
you're going to see how you can
create a model from scratch,
but to save time,
we're going to import that
XML file that I showed you earlier.
and Xcode is going to build an
entity relationship diagram based
on the structure of that XML file.
And if we take a look, we have persons,
events, tasks,
an event management sort of model.
So now we have our model,
let's build our user interface.
We'll head into our document nib file.
Get rid of this.
And what we're going
to do is option drag,
in this case the person entity,
let me pick it up here,
into interface builder.
Interface builder is going to
ask us whether we want a user
interface for one object handled by
an object controller or many objects
handled by an array controller.
We're going to deal with
many objects in this case.
And you'll notice that a user
interface has been built based on the
properties of the person in the model.
And in addition, an array controller has
been added to the project.
Let's just take a look at the
bindings of this text field here.
Take a look at the value.
And you'll notice that it's hooked
up to the array controller selection
for the model key path first name.
It's just a straight
standard Cocoa binding.
In fact,
all of the user interface is dealing
with Cocoa bindings in that array
controller in the way it has in Panther.
So what's the new stuff?
Well, if we take a look at
the array controller,
you'll notice a couple of additional
features designed to integrate
Cocoa bindings with core data.
The first is instead of
naming a concrete class,
we have the choice to pick an entity,
in this case a person,
so that the array controller knows
what type of thing it's dealing with.
If we look at the bindings
of the array controller,
you'll notice a new binding
called "managed object context."
And the managed object context,
Andreas will be talking about it later,
but in essence,
it's the object that's providing and
doing a lot of the heavy lifting for the
functionality that we're going to see in
a moment when I build this application.
So, one entity is kind of useful,
but very few applications
deal with one kind of object
and one kind of object alone.
Core Data is actually very good
at dealing with relationships
between types of objects.
So, a person is related to many tasks.
Let's get a user interface for a task,
many tasks in fact.
Let's clean this up a little.
Again,
these are just plain old IB things,
so we can get rid of them if we want to.
Let's get that task field a
little bigger so we can read it,
get rid of some stuff.
Okay.
Now let's take a look at
that task array controller.
We do need to bind its content so it
knows where it's getting its tasks from.
We're going to bind that
content to the person array,
its selection, and within that selection,
the tasks of the selected person.
Let's save our change and let's build
our happy little application here.
While that's building,
let's just take a look at the types
of documents that we can save to.
Predefined is the binary archive format,
the SQLite document format,
as well as the XML format.
So our build has succeeded.
Let's run.
Hide a bunch of stuff.
And here's our application.
Let's open up that XML file
that we had seen earlier.
And you'll notice that indeed as I jump
through the items in this table view,
everything's updating.
I'm seeing all of the
tasks that are related.
It looks like Andreas has the
most to do out of everybody.
We have all the common Cocoa bindings,
sorts of features such as sorting,
such as multiple selection,
and some new goodies such as filtering.
So if I type in some filtering there,
it will filter for me.
And the UI has automatically built
in a menu so I can pick particular
things that I want to filter upon.
Now let's jump on over to our
new document and add some people.
Let's add Bob Jones,
let's add Barry Bonds, and let's save.
So I'm going to save,
again these file formats appear here.
Let's do the SQL thing, call that test,
we'll save it.
And on our desktop is
that SQLite document which
represents the SQL database.
And let's close the doc.
Now let's open it up again,
thus proving beyond a shadow
of a doubt that it persisted.
And there it is.
I think I forgot to type
in "bonds". There we go.
So let's make it persist, eh?
There we go.
What did I do?
I may have disconnected that
text field in Interface Builder.
My apologies.
Okay, with that, let's add a new person.
Betty Brandt,
and let's change Bob to Robert.
and let's remove Barry for legal reasons.
Now, you'll notice looking at the
document that the window does
know a change has occurred.
It is dirty and if we go to
the edit menu we do have undo.
So let's undo through this.
We should get Barry back,
Robert should get back to Bob,
and Betty should disappear,
and of course redo.
And if we... Feel free.
And if we quit, of course,
it knows the dock is dirty
in Alaska if we want to save.
We don't want to save.
Okay.
Let me close up this project.
I'd like to show you one more
thing beyond that codeless demo,
which is that that's a
very Cocoa-centric demo.
This application here, the three bears,
is a Carbon application that's using
Core Data underneath for its persistence.
And in fact, this is the XML file
that it's writing to.
Let me just open that up in TextEdit.
And so, we'll add the baby bear
whose height is very small.
We'll save and quit and restart,
and indeed it has persisted.
And then if we get the
saved version from disk,
you'll notice that that
XML document has updated.
So, let's take a look at the project.
and it's in Objective C++ and
it's the code here that is doing
a bit of transition between
those Objective C objects from
Core Data and Core Foundation types
that Carbon would be able to use.
And so,
depending on which flavor you wish,
you can use Core Data with both.
So thank you very much
and now back to Andreas.
Thank you, James.
Now let's talk about models.
Models are high-level
description of your data objects.
They're essentially entity
relationship diagrams of your objects.
And the model is what's needed by
Core Data to implement all these nice
features like Android Redo and ultimately
read and write your data objects to disk.
In fact,
the model is all that Core Data needs.
As you saw in the demos before,
there was no additional code really
necessary to do all this work.
One thing that's important, though,
for you to keep in mind is
that you and your models,
you would have to spend
quality time together.
The models need to be very
detailed for us to do a good job,
so the more detailed
you make your models,
the better of a job Core Data can do.
One thing that's interesting in
this context is that we decided
to separate the five formats for
the models you edit in Xcode and
the models you load at runtime.
The reason for that is that Xcode
manages additional information
that you don't need at runtime,
like the layout information of
your diagram and maybe the colors
you chose for the different boxes.
And we didn't want to burden
the runtime with that.
So while your project is building,
you're actually translating the model
as it is written in Xcode and managed
in Xcode into a new file format
that is then imported at runtime.
Models essentially consist of two pieces:
entities and properties.
Entities describe the types of objects,
and properties describe the
individual object components,
the values inside those objects.
For each entity,
you can specify a class name that is
used to represent that entity at runtime.
And specifying the class name
here will turn out to be the most
important hook for you to plug
in your own application logic.
Another thing that's interesting
about entities is that they can
be organized in a hierarchy,
which is actually independent
of the class hierarchy you use.
So, for example,
if you have a person entity,
you might have sub-entities
like employee and customer.
and you can then map those entities
to either a class hierarchy that
is the same or to classes that
have nothing to do with each other,
or you can even map those three entities
to the same object class at runtime.
That's actually fairly common.
The advantage for you to use entity
inheritance that you model the
types of data is that you can,
for example, define your queries on
the abstract entity.
You can still search for all persons and
then get back customers and employees.
So there's a lot of flexibility for you
when you work with your data objects.
For properties,
we support three different types:
attributes, relationships,
and fetch properties.
Attributes represent the simple
types of data in your object,
like strings, numbers, dates,
and maybe binary data like images.
And relationships represent
references of objects to each other,
and they'll be distinguished between
"to one" and "to many" relationships.
A "to one" relationship
is simply a pointer,
a reference to another object.
A "to many" relationship is a collection
of references to other objects.
In this first release,
we're going to support only
unordered relationships,
and the natural representation
for that is actually an NSSet.
Going forward,
we're probably going to add support
for ordered relationships too,
and those will be
represented by NSArrays.
For NSArrays,
we will then also archive the
order of the object in that
array in the data stores.
Relations typically come in pairs.
If you have a person
that points to a company,
there's usually also a pointer back
from the company to the person.
Those relationships are
called inverse relationships,
and they make your
object graph very rich,
actually.
It makes it much easier to
navigate through your object graph.
So we recommend that you typically enter
the inverse relationships in your model,
too.
Fetch properties are
similar to relationships,
but they are much more loosely bound.
You can think of them as smart groups.
To make it more concrete for you,
in an SQL database,
a relationship will actually result in
a join that is enforced in the database.
A fetch property is much
more of a loose query.
So for all these properties,
the model contains a
wealth of information,
starting with validation rules.
Those are the kind of
mechanical validation rules,
like the length of a string,
or maybe the value of the
expression a string has to match,
min and max values for numbers and dates,
those kind of things.
There are also delete
rules for relationships,
and those delete rules tell
Core Data what to do if an object
is removed from your object graph.
Typically,
there's something like a ripple
effect if you remove an object.
Let's say you have a person object which
has addresses and contact information.
If you delete that person,
you want to get rid of
the other information too.
And delete rules allow you to
specify that kind of behavior.
And there are different choices.
You can kind of cascade the delete,
so that's the ripple effect.
You can deny a delete,
depending on the situation.
So there's a lot of flexibility
in these delete rules.
And also for attributes,
we store default values.
Those are simply the values assigned
to your object when they are inserted.
So, this table summarizes the kind
of mapping we do at runtime.
An entity essentially maps to a class,
an attribute maps to a
simple instance variable,
and a relationship maps
to a managed reference or
collection of these references.
They are pointers.
There are some more things in the
model that I want to go over quickly.
Startinging with predefined queries,
you can enter pretty much templates
for the common queries you want to do,
you want to perform in your application.
Again, something like a smart group
would be a good example here.
Typically,
you would specify variable names
within those queries and then
substitute concrete values at runtime.
So those are very handy and it's actually
a huge convenience for you to specify
those queries in the model upfront.
There are also some that we call
"configurations" in the model.
A configuration is pretty much
a named group of entities,
and those configurations are used in
the more advanced cases when you talk
to multiple data files at the same time.
Each configuration then
maps to one data file,
and you can pretty much predefine
the mapping to the different data
files in the model by separating
those configurations and naming them.
The last thing I want to mention is
that we also decided to give you some
flexibility to customize the model.
We added so-called "user info
dictionaries" to entities and properties.
You can store your own
information in there.
These are pretty much arbitrary key value
pairs you can enter in the modeling tool.
The typical use case for that
is actually localization.
So with that,
I'd like to ask Bill Bumgarner
to come up on stage.
There he is.
And he will give you a more
detailed demo of the model.
[Transcript missing]
You'll see that this
arrow right here updated.
That's because, of course,
the arrows indicate the
ordinality of the relationship.
Relationships are allowed to have
ordinality so that you can say
a car can only have four tires,
that kind of thing.
And upon save and upon manipulating
the objects at runtime,
the system will validate that.
Andreas will be getting
into that in more detail.
Now, there's some other...we've learned
a lot about modeling tools.
We, as some of you might know,
we've done some things
wrong in the past and...
Hopefully you'll find this
to be a refreshing change.
So one of those is that it was tedious
and annoying to have to go through a
model and edit a particular part of an
attribute over and over and over again.
So what you can actually do is
you can come in here and you can
multiple select in here and you'll
see that the inspectors over here
update to only show you the items
that are relevant to those things.
I can come in here and I can
select first name and last name,
and I can change the validation rules
for both of those at the same time.
But of course,
often times when you're modeling stuff,
you'll have attributes across
many entities that will need
to be changed at the same time.
So I can come in here
and select them all,
and then I can sort by entity,
or I can sort by property or kind,
and then I can again select
multiple across multiple entities
and edit them all at once.
We also have the fetched request editor.
So if I come in here,
I can build a new fetch request,
and I can then actually
edit the predicate,
and we give you a
graphical predicate editor.
So we can come into here, and let's say,
we will say this is confirmed, yes,
and we also want to make
sure that the date is,
well, less than, you know,
and we can say maybe we
want to add an "or" here,
so we can say the date is greater than
[Transcript missing]
If I wanted to say, "Oh, well,
this really should be at the top
level," I can just drag it up there,
and it'll restructure
itself appropriately.
And then of course, as Andreas mentioned,
there is the user info here.
So it's just key value pairs.
So we allow you to annotate your
models with whatever you need.
Thank you.
And then of course, as Andreas mentioned,
there is the user info here.
So it's just key value pairs.
So we allow you to annotate your
models with whatever you need.
Thank you.
As I mentioned before,
the most important hook for you
for that is to specify your own
data object classes in the model.
One requirement we have with Core Data is
that we require you to subclass a new
class that we call NSManagedObject.
NSManagedObject actually
is a generic data object,
so you can use it with an
arbitrary entity in your model.
That's what we did with the demos so far.
There were no custom data
object classes in there,
so we just used the NSManagedObject.
It's not doing very smart things,
such as storing, getting,
and setting values,
and it's performing the validation rules.
But for your own custom logic,
you will subclass that and then
add your own specific code for your
problem domain inside those subclasses.
That said, NSManagedObjects are probably
sufficient for many cases.
If you don't need anything special,
just stick with NSManagedObject.
It's much more convenient.
When you subclass,
you typically implement your own logic
in the normal setters and getters
that are defined with QValue coding,
the naming schemes we defined
with QValue coding observing.
The same is true for validation,
and we also added a bunch of hooks
notifications for you in your
objects where you have methods
that you can override to react to
different kind of state changes.
And I'd actually like to
walk you now through most of
the API of NSManagedObject.
The init method takes two arguments.
First of all, the entity that the object
actually represents.
The second argument is this
NSManagedObjectContext.
James already referred to
it a little bit in his demo.
And the ManagedObjectContext is the
object that does all the work for you.
It triggers the undo and redo,
it triggers the validation.
Every managed object obviously needs to
be assigned to a ManagedObjectContext.
The first thing you should do if
you create a new object is insert
it into a ManagedObjectContext.
There's a get method for it,
and there's also a method to
get the entity of the object.
And getting the entity can be
very handy at runtime if you
want to do some introspection.
It's actually very similar to
using the class information
stored in the Objective-C runtime.
You can use the entity to get
more information of your objects:
what properties are there,
what attributes,
what relationships are there,
to what other entities can you
navigate from a given object,
those kind of things.
Managed objects also have an object ID.
The object ID is pretty much a unique
reference that is created when your
object is stored in the file system,
and it's guaranteed to stay the same
throughout the lifetime of that object.
So if you ever need to get a hold
of an object and then store it
away and get back to it later,
that object ID is a good
reference for you to use.
To react to state changes,
there are a bunch of
methods you can override.
First of all, there are some get methods.
The method just is inserted, is updated,
is deleted.
They just tell you about
the state of the object.
They are very handy in
the context of bindings.
For example,
you can wire up the enabled binding
of a text field to one of these
methods if you only want it to be
editable in certain situations.
There are methods that inform you if
the object was just fetched or inserted.
Typically, you initialize your own
caches in those methods.
And there are methods that
tell you that an object is
about to be deleted or saved.
And here you can
typically set some values,
maybe a timestamp right
before it's saved,
something like that.
For key-value coding and observing,
we just follow the normal standards.
The generic methods are
valueForKey and setValueForKey.
You typically don't override
those methods directly,
but instead you implement
your own accessors.
Those generic methods call out into
custom versions of the key-value
coding methods like setName and
name to get the name property.
One thing that's new in this release
is that we also added support for set
mutators if you want to modify too
many relationships since they are all
represented by sets in this release.
They work the same way as the array
mutators worked in the last release.
You pretty much get a hold of a
mutable set for a given key and
then you modify that set and that
modifies the relationship indirectly.
There are two more things
that are interesting in the
context of key-value coding and
observing with managed objects.
Number one is that you typically
still want to access the generic data
storage mechanism of managed objects.
You don't need to add your own
IVARs to store your values.
You can continue to use
the generic mechanism.
And actually we recommend that you do
that because you can optimize the access
to the values much better if you continue
using that generic storage mechanism.
So to access the values,
we added the primitive
key-value coding methods:
primitive_value_for_key and
set_primitive_value_for_key.
And again,
you use them in your own custom accesses
like set_name and name to call out
into the generic storage mechanism.
And then the accesses need to be wrapped
by "will change" and "did change" methods
and also now "will access" and "did
access" methods and the "read" methods.
Key-value observing actually
has this really nice behavior to
do this automatically for you.
We don't have that
implemented for NSObject yet.
We hope to have that ready by the
end of the release when we ship.
But at this time you will have
to explicitly call "will change"
and "did change" in your "set"
methods and "will access" and "did
access" in your "get" methods.
So this would be an example.
For example, if you have a social
security number property,
the "set" method would jump out in the
first call "will change" then access
the "set primitive value" for "key"
and then call the "did change" method.
The "get" method would first call
"will access" then "primitive value"
for "key" and then "did access".
And of course you can insert your
own code in between here if you
want to do your own customizations.
For validation, it's very similar.
The generic method is
validate_value for key error.
Again, you typically don't
overwrite that directly.
Instead, you implement those
custom methods we call,
something like validate_name error.
And there are additional methods
for the state changes where you
can validate the state changes.
So, validate_for_delete,
insert_and_update, you can deny a delete,
for example.
Those would be two concrete examples.
Again, that's a social security number.
First check whether the value
is actually of a valid type,
and then maybe check the length,
and if it's not the right one,
you can create an error.
And also you can deny an insert.
You can pretty much intercept a save
and deny that save if the social
security number isn't set yet.
So let's look at the architecture
of Core Data and what actually
happens to your managed objects.
What we already heard is that the
managed objects are always assigned
to a managed object context.
That's the object that has
most of the work for you.
To the UI side,
the managed object context
is simply hooked up,
usually through Cocoa bindings to the UI.
You don't have to use bindings.
We saw an example with the Carbon UI,
for example.
But it's the most convenient
way to handle managed objects.
So you simply hook up a Cocoa bindings
controller to the managed object context.
It will then go and filter the objects
out that need to be displayed in the UI.
It will sort them,
prepare them for the UI,
and then populate the user interface.
To the other side,
to the persistent side,
Managed Object Context is hooked
up to Persistent Store Coordinator.
That coordinator is the one
that provides the model,
so it tells the Managed Object Context
what types of entities are available.
And it's also the object that
synchronizes the access to the different
data files of your application.
Let's take a step back
and summarize quickly.
The managed object context is
the center of your new world.
It's really the thing that
manages everything for you.
It does undo and redo,
it triggers validation,
maintains the inverse relationships
that I mentioned before.
All that work happens in
the managed object context.
It serves as the gateway to the
persistent store coordinator.
If you want an analogy for it,
it's something like a scratch pad.
It allows you to load objects into
memory from your external files,
then modify them,
and then either save them back to the
file system or just throw the changes
away if you don't need them anymore.
Persistent Store Coordinator is the
instance that provides the model.
It synchronizes the access
to the persistent stores.
And the idea really is that
if you use multiple stores,
multiple files at the same time,
it represents something
like a unit of them.
So it merges the content
of all the files together.
And to the managed object context,
it just looks like it's talking
to one single data source.
What's important here for this first
release is that we only support
striping in this first release.
So you can merge the content of different
data files together in one context,
but we don't support mirroring.
I want to talk a little more
about memory management.
I'd already mentioned that we
We will give you good scalability by
only keeping the pieces of your object
graph in memory that are actually needed.
Needed means that the objects are
either changed or they are currently
displayed by the UI or referenced by
any other part of your application.
Core Data will make sure that your
object graph grows on demand if you
go deeper into your object graph.
One concept I want to mention
here is the concept of faulting.
Most of the time, let's go back to the
example that we had before,
the XML file that we
showed in the beginning,
you have an event management system.
It's common that you look
at a table of data objects,
but if you drill down,
it's uncommon that you
actually take a look at all
the objects in your data file.
So, we will make sure that we
only fetch those objects
into memory that are needed.
But you as the developer,
you shouldn't have to worry
about whether an object has
actually been fetched into memory,
whether it has been
fully initialized or not.
And so the concept that we use here is
a concept of little placeholder objects.
Essentially,
when you fetch an object into memory,
it's surrounded by little
placeholders that we call faults.
And those faults are
not fully initialized,
so we haven't done the work to
actually go to the persistent
store and get the data from it,
so it saves a lot of
time and memory there.
But the placeholder object
is a valid reference.
So let's say you have that event
object that has tasks assigned to it.
The task objects can be referenced.
Those placeholders are valid references.
You don't have to worry about whether
those are fully initialized or not.
And we do this pretty much
automatically for you.
The good thing for you is that you don't
have to worry about whether the object
has been fetched into memory or not.
For you, it's completely transparent.
In a typical document-based application,
you will use multiple stacks
of Core Data in parallel,
stacks that are completely isolated.
So each document will typically
have its own managed object context,
its own persistent store coordinator,
and will typically talk
to a single document.
In a non-document-based application,
you usually have multiple
stores that you want to combine.
You might have a store in
the user's home directory,
some additional ones in the network,
and maybe you even have removable media
that contain additional data files,
additional stores.
So then again,
the persistent store coordinator
manages the access to all
these files at the same time,
and it presents a unit of the stores
to the managed object context.
Let's take a look at what happens
if you actually fetch objects,
if you load objects into memory.
Typically,
a request is triggered by the UI layer.
For example, a Nib file is loaded that
contains a controller.
That controller is hooked up
to a managed object context,
and when it's trying to populate the UI,
it submits what we call a fetch
request to the managed object context.
So it's going down the stack.
The managed object context will
forward that request to the
persistent store coordinator,
which will take a look at the
model and then decide what kind
of data file it needs to access.
It will load the objects from
the data files and send the data
to the managed object context,
which will then materialize
that object graph.
And then the controller...
We'll filter out which ones actually
need to be displayed in the UI,
we'll sort and prepare them,
and then populate the user interface.
And then over time,
when you fetch more objects,
if you have maybe loaded
additional Nib files,
or if you look at different
master/detail relationships,
the object graph will
simply grow over time.
When changes happen,
those changes usually start in the UI,
the user goes into the text
field and enters a new value.
With the help of the controller,
it will then access the data objects.
and we'll start applying new
values to the data objects.
And that in turn will cause a key value
observing notification to be sent out,
so the managed object context
will be notified of the
changes in the object graph.
And it will then start
tracking the changes,
it will start undo and redo,
managing the undo manager,
all these things.
Essentially, managed object context will
observe all the changes to
your object graph over time.
So if additional objects change,
it will simply track all that.
If objects are inserted,
if objects are deleted,
it will keep track of all these changes.
And then when you save,
that request usually
again starts in the UI,
it ends up on the managed object context,
and the managed object context will
then package up all the changes,
all the deltas to your object graph,
send them to the persistent
store coordinator,
which will again take a look at
the model to find out which data
files the changes have to go,
it will update the data files for you,
and then on success, it will notify the
managed object context,
which will reset the object
graph to a clean state,
and then everything
starts from the beginning.
I'd like to introduce you to
one more concept that is very
fundamental to Core Data,
and that's the concept of predicates.
Predicates define filters.
They're used for queries.
And typically,
you either pre-define them in the model,
you use substitution variables
for which you can then substitute
the concrete values at runtime,
or you create them programmatically,
which is usually based on the user input,
for example, in a search field.
You can evaluate
predicates both in memory,
if you already have objects fetched,
you can filter them out in memory.
And sometimes we decide to translate a
predicate into another query language.
In the context of SQL,
we want to make use of the
capabilities of the SQL database,
which can do the queries
very optimised and very fast.
So we will translate those predicates
into SQL and perform the fetch there.
NSPredicates,
the classes that represent predicates,
are also used outside of
the Core Data context.
The new metadata API in
Cocoa uses predicates.
We also use it to implement
filtering in the NSArrayController.
These are some examples for
predicates you can write.
It starts with simple comparisons
like "name = Tom". We support case
and diacritic insensitive lookups.
"Contains" is the operator,
and then you can have an additional flag,
the "C" for case insensitive and
the "D" for diacritic insensitive.
We support logical operations,
"and", "or", and "not". We allow
you to look into relationships.
For one relationship,
you simply just follow a key path,
like "group.name". For too
many relationships,
we give you additional operators,
like "all" and "any". So you
can look up persons for which
all children are older than 12,
or just some of them.
and we even support things like simple
operations like computing the sum of
all the prices of some items in a list.
So as you can see,
there's a lot of flexibility here in
Predicates to define the types of queries
you want to perform on your data objects.
At runtime, predicates are represented as
a tree of NSPredicate objects.
There are three classes
you will encounter.
NSPredicate is the abstract superclass.
NSCompoundPredicate is the class that
represents logical gates like AND,
OR, NOT.
And NSComparisonPredicate is
the predicate that performs
all the different operators,
the different comparisons like less than,
greater than, contains, matches.
There's a list of operators we support.
Comparison predicates use
NSExpression objects to provide
the actual computation values.
There are different types of expressions.
Again, there are expressions
for constant values,
expressions that follow key paths.
Again, there's a list of different
types of expressions we support.
What I think is really important
for you is that the predicate
architecture is extensible.
So you're not limited to
the data types we support.
If you want to define special operators
that work on NSColors or on NSImages,
you're free to do so with
the predicate architecture.
And now I think we have
another demo for you.
And Bill is going to just show
you some predicates in action.
- Okay.
So I'm first going to show you
just briefly a little application
that I use to pull a bunch of data.
And mostly I just wanted to
show the model briefly because
this will be the model that will
be used for the other demos.
This is actually an application that
will go out to Amazon through their
public API and will pull a bunch of
information about books you search for,
and then will populate
a core data database.
So if I wanted to,
I could go out and say, you know,
search for everything with Cocoa in it,
and it's going out making a WSDL-based
web services SOAP call to Amazon,
pulling the data back,
throwing it in a core data data store,
and then throwing it up in
our default user interface,
including cover art.
So that's just a simple little app,
a few lines of code.
So that's our data model there.
What we're going to be looking
at is products and manufacturers.
Amazon uses manufacturers
because they make more than --
or they sell more than books.
So think of them as publishers.
Okay.
So let me close that
down and go to Booklist.
So I decided I wanted a little
application that I could use to grab
a bunch of books from Amazon and
start building up my wish list.
So I wrote a little app and let
me go ahead and open some data.
book data.
As you can see,
I get a big list of books and
their prices and et cetera.
And now I can apply
some predicates to it.
So the first predicate I'm going
to apply is just a very simple one.
I want to find all the books or all
of the entities of type product that
have the product name contains the word
"coco." So you can see it's executed,
and there it is.
Now, predicates can also do
some more complex things,
like I can say, "Show me all of the books
at Amazon where the price is
between $15 and $25." As well,
since predicates are all
based on key value coding,
and it should be emphasized that they
aren't limited to just managed objects.
They will work with any object in the
system that's key value coding compliant.
I can also follow key value paths.
So in this case,
I'm going to ask all of my products
for all of their manufacturers
and then ask for all manufacturer
names that begin with O'Reilly.
So as you can see there,
it's actually following the key paths.
So I'm going to say,
"I'm looking for O'Reilly," and
I get my list of books from O'Reilly.
Now,
I can also do things where I'm testing
if one object is in a set of objects that
are related to another set of objects.
So in this case,
if I want to go in and find everything
on Microsoft Press and McGraw-Hill
and Addison Wesley and Sam's,
I can do that.
Now I should actually show
you a little bit of code here.
This is a simple little application.
To apply the predicate
in the first place,
that's not it.
There it is.
This is the line of code.
Oh, I should scroll a little bit.
These are the two lines of code
necessary to create a predicate
and apply it to an array.
The first line will actually
take that string that you
saw in the user interface,
those were actual real
live predicate expressions.
It will evaluate it,
turn it into a predicate object,
which you can then programmatically
query or take apart if you want to.
And then it will apply it to
an array and return the array
of objects that result from it.
There's also a mutable
array version of this,
so you can take a mutable array
full of objects and reduce it by
whatever objects pass the predicate.
The second example also shows
how to do custom predicates.
So in the case of this user interface,
I needed to basically check to
see if a particular product has
a manufacturer of this set of
manufacturers I have selected in this UI.
And in that case, in this line of code,
I'm actually creating
a comparison predicate
and comparison predicates always have a
left expression and a right expression.
So in this case I'm saying the
left expression is the evaluated
object and all that means is that
it's the object in the array of
books that I'm trying to filter.
It's the thing I want to filter.
And the right expression in this
case is a constant value and
it's my selected manufacturers.
It's just whatever
I have selected in here.
And in this case I said I want
to use a custom selector,
which is member of array.
And this is going to be a method that's
going to be invoked on objects from
the left hand side and it will take
an argument from the right hand side
will be the argument passed to it.
So in a category on NSManagedObject,
because in this demo we're using
nothing but managed objects,
I wrote the member of array method,
which as you can see is
pretty straightforward.
So using this, leveraging this,
you could, like Andrea said,
you could qualify anything.
You could predicate any object as
long as you have key values in it.
So you could have a method that takes a
single argument and returns a Boolean.
Now if you get into expressions,
which are more complex,
then you could open it up even further.
Now I have one more demo.
We at Apple like to eat our own dog food.
So this is actually the core data
predicates are being used by metadata
in the Objective-C API to metadata.
Let me go ahead and run this application.
And it comes up and it gives you a
field and you can type a query into it,
which is going to be a metadata query.
And it will show a list
of files that result.
So, for example, I can ask it,
"Show me all files
Let's start with the word "app
delegate" in their file name.
It takes a second, but there it comes.
You can see that the results
are filling in as it goes.
This is again because it's
all leveraging key value
observing and key value binding.
We can do some more complex queries,
like for example,
I have a metadata importer
that grabs Objective-C metadata
from Objective-C source files.
In this case,
I'm going to find all files on
my hard drive that implement
subclasses of NSView,
which is pretty handy if you want
to find stuff in example code.
Now, let's look at the code.
The code for this is actually
quite straightforward.
and you can ignore the
notification center stuff.
That's an unfortunate hack necessary
to make the demo work right now.
It goes away.
It doesn't exist.
Those lines are not there.
So we simply create a query and then
we set the predicate on the query
and again you see that line of code.
Predicate will format argument array.
And that's it.
Start the query, you're done.
So those are predicates.
[Transcript missing]
Of course,
the seat you have in your own hands
right now is a very early bit,
so not everything is
fully working right now.
SQLite,
you already saw it working here on stage,
but the access for you in the
seat is not available right now.
The other two things worth mentioning
is that controllers aren't as live
as we'd like them to be right now.
We'd like them to react much
better to adding and removing
persistent stores on the fly,
and then update the UI automatically.
We don't have all that implemented yet,
and also fetch properties
aren't supported at this time.
Then of course,
the little things like localization,
better error messages,
leaks optimizations,
that all is still forthcoming.
That said, the complete API can be
completely exercised with the
XML store that actually works
fully in the seat that we have.
So we would like you to...
So, please try it out.
We would like to get your feedback.
You can send an email to
cocoafeedback@group.apple.com
or you can submit bug reports.
Actually,
submitting bug reports is probably
the best way for you to communicate
feature requests and ideas and
also the bugs you encounter.
Thank you.
So in summary,
Core Data is a model-driven framework.
It manages your objects.
It persists your objects.
It automatically updates
your UI to Cocoa bindings.
It solves some very difficult
problems like undo and redo.
It gives you great scalability.
It gives you choice in persistent stores.
We support SQL databases, XML files,
and binary files.
We have added some good
support in Xcode for modeling.
There's a great modeling tool for you.
And really the benefit for you
is that you will write a lot
or significantly less code.
You'll be a lot faster while
you develop your application.
So that was my summary.
The good news for you is that
there's going to be a second summary.
So last year we had a little
song to go with Cocoa Bindings
called Model View Controller.
And this year,
with the focus on Core Data and
building some data models,
since the songwriting tends to
go where the technology leads me,
it's a little song about data modeling.
So we need to switch over to the laptop.
Excellent.
So hope you like it.
They say, "Are you in modeling?" I say,
"Oh yes I am." There's no catwalk
involved in the modeling I do.
There's no demand for me to
try that kind of modeling too.
Some people want a data
model for a new application,
don't want to write a lot of code,
simply use configuration to refine
your data model with each new
iteration as you build a prototype
with persistence automation.
Some people want to date a model
but prefer one in fashion If you
date a data model that's an interest
and passion You're a dreamer with
a schema you can usually cash in
Though you ain't got the looks in your
clothes they are clashing Modeling man,
I'm a modeling man Let me lay it
all out so that you'll understand
You'll have the terminology and
concepts at your command  So you
can also be a modeling woman or man
You design your data model as
pretty as you please by adding items
to the model known as entities.
And entities are right by me.
It's what a thing's supposed to be.
What type, what sort, what class,
what kind,
whatever you might have in mind.
You pick a name, map to a class.
Now your model's growing fast.
You work some more and come to grips
with attributes and relationships.
You design your data model as
pretty as you please by adding items
to the model known as entities.
And entities are right by me.
It's what a thing's supposed to be.
What type, what sort, what class,
what kind,
whatever you might have in mind.
You pick a name, map to a class.
Now your model's growing fast.
You work some more and come to grips
with attributes and relationships.
Now your model's growing fast.
You work some more and come to grips
with attributes and relationships.
Now baby, now you're modeling too.
I said, "Baby,
what more for a mildly man to do?"
[Transcript missing]
I said I'm a modeling man,
I'm a modeling man.
They say, "Are you in modeling?" I say,
"Oh yes I am." There's no photographers
involved in the modeling I do.
I got turned down by everyone
I gave my headshot to.
[Transcript missing]
The entities can be connected,
kinda joined at the hip.
The formal name for this
arrangement is a relationship.
One object references the other,
so it can't give it the slip.
The inverse reference is maintained
for a convenient round trip.
I said, I said, "I'm a modeling man,
yeah, I'm a modeling man." They say,
"Are you in modeling?" I say, "Oh, yes,
I am." But don't come knocking if
it's rocking in the back of the van.
I'm probably wrestling with
relationships I don't quite understand.
[Transcript missing]
I have the boring task
to finish up the session,
if you could switch back to the slides.
There are a few more sessions
I'd like to point you to that
are related to Core Data.
Using and customizing Cocoa bindings
this afternoon at 5:00,
we'll have a little piece
on the UI part of Core Data.
Tomorrow morning at 10:30,
there's advanced Core Data.
And on Friday morning at 9:00,
we have an overview of the
modeling tool in depth,
modeling and design in Xcode.
These are the usual people to contact.